[TaskLocals] read as `traceID` bind as `$traceID.withValue` (#1347)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/0311-task-locals.md

* Review: ([first review](https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0311-task-local-values/47478)) ([second review](https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0311-2nd-review-task-local-values/47738))

## Table of Contents

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Motivation](#motivation)
* [Proposed solution](#proposed-solution)
  + [Task Local Values](#task-local-values-1)
* [Detailed design](#detailed-design)
  + [Declaring task-local values](#declaring-task-local-values)
  + [Binding task-local values](#binding-task-local-values)
    - [Binding values for the duration of a child-task](#binding-values-for-the-duration-of-a-child-task)
    - [Binding task-local values from synchronous functions](#binding-task-local-values-from-synchronous-functions)
    - [Task-local value and tasks which outlive their scope](#task-local-value-and-tasks-which-outlive-their-scope)
  + [Task-local value lifecycle](#task-local-value-lifecycle)
  + [Reading task-local values](#reading-task-local-values)

>     - [Reading task-local values: implementation details](#reading-task-local-values--implementation-details)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Reading task-local values: implementation details](#reading-task-local-values-implementation-details)
```

    - [Child task and value lifetimes](#child-task-and-value-lifetimes)
      * [Task-local value item allocations](#task-local-value-item-allocations)

>   + [Similarities and differences with SwiftUI `Environment`](#similarities-and-differences-with-swiftui--environment-)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + [Similarities and differences with SwiftUI `Environment`](#similarities-and-differences-with-swiftui-environment)
```

* [Prior Art](#prior-art)

>   + [Kotlin: CoroutineContext[T]](#kotlin--coroutinecontext-t-)
>   + [Java/Loom: Scope Variables](#java-loom--scope-variables)
>   + [Go: explicit context passing all the way](#go--explicit-context-passing-all-the-way)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + [Kotlin: CoroutineContext[T]](#kotlin-coroutinecontextt)
  + [Java/Loom: Scope Variables](#javaloom-scope-variables)
  + [Go: explicit context passing all the way](#go-explicit-context-passing-all-the-way)
```

* [Alternatives Considered](#alternatives-considered)

>   + [Surface API: Type-based key definitions](#surface-api--type-based-key-definitions)
>   + [Surface API: Key-less value definitions](#surface-api--key-less-value-definitions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + [Surface API: Type-based key definitions](#surface-api-type-based-key-definitions)
  + [Surface API: Key-less value definitions](#surface-api-key-less-value-definitions)
```

* [Rejected Alternatives](#rejected-alternatives)
  + [Plain-old Thread Local variables](#plain-old-thread-local-variables)
  + [Dispatch Queue Specific Values](#dispatch-queue-specific-values)
* [Intended use-cases](#intended-use-cases)

>   + [Use case: Distributed Tracing & Contextual Logging](#use-case--distributed-tracing---contextual-logging)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + [Use case: Distributed Tracing & Contextual Logging](#use-case-distributed-tracing--contextual-logging)
```

    - [Contextual Logging](#contextual-logging)
    - [Function Tracing](#function-tracing)
    - [Distributed Tracing](#distributed-tracing)

>     - [Future direction: Function wrapper interaction](#future-direction--function-wrapper-interaction)
>   + [Use case: Mocking internals (Swift System)](#use-case--mocking-internals--swift-system-)
>   + [Use case: Progress Monitoring](#use-case--progress-monitoring)
>   + [Use case: Executor configuration](#use-case--executor-configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Future direction: Function wrapper interaction](#future-direction-function-wrapper-interaction)
  + [Use case: Mocking internals (Swift System)](#use-case-mocking-internals-swift-system)
  + [Use case: Progress Monitoring](#use-case-progress-monitoring)
  + [Use case: Executor configuration](#use-case-executor-configuration)
```

* [Future Directions](#future-directions)

>   + [Additional configuration options for `@TaskLocal`](#additional-configuration-options-for---tasklocal-)
>   + [Tracing annotations with Function Wrappers](#tracing-annotations-with-function-wrappers)
>   + [Language features to avoid nesting with `withValue`](#language-features-to-avoid-nesting-with--withvalue-)
>   + [Specialized TaskLocal Value Inheritance Semantics](#specialized-tasklocal-value-inheritance-semantics)
>     - ["Never" task-local value inheritance](#-never--task-local-value-inheritance)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  + [Additional configuration options for `@TaskLocal`](#additional-configuration-options-for-tasklocal)
  + [Tracing annotations with Function Wrappers](#tracing-annotations-with-function-wrappers)
  + [Language features to avoid nesting with `withValue`](#language-features-to-avoid-nesting-with-withvalue)
  + [Specialized TaskLocal Value Inheritance Semantics](#specialized-tasklocal-value-inheritance-semantics)
    - ["Never" task-local value inheritance](#never-task-local-value-inheritance)
```

Task local values may be read from any function running within an asynchronous context. This includes *synchronous* functions which were called from an asynchronous function. Binding a task-local value however must be performed in an asynchronous function.

A task-local must be declared as a static stored property, and annotated using the `@TaskLocal` property wrapper. 

```swift
enum MyLibrary {
  @TaskLocal
  static var requestID: RequestID? 
}
```

> > 💡 Note: Once property wrappers are allowed on top-level global declarations, it would also be possible to declare top-level task locals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 💡 Note: Property wrappers are currently not allowed on global declarations.  If this is changed, it should become possible to declare top-level task locals.
```

> The important thing about declaring a task-local is that there must be one instance of it. Not doing so is very likely a programmer mistake, will lead to increased and unexpected memory use by multiple instances of the task-local key (the wrapper instances), as well as lead to unexpected lookup behavior, because each instance acts as it's own unique key for the task local storage lookups.

Reviewer 2: This is a strange paragraph.  Perhaps it can be reworded to be more informational in tone and less cautionary?  Like: 

> Each task-local declaration represents its own, independent task-local storage.  Reading from one declaration will never observe a value stored using a different declaration, even if the declarations look exactly the same.

> The important thing about declaring a task-local is that there must be one instance of it. Not doing so is very likely a programmer mistake, will lead to increased and unexpected memory use by multiple instances of the task-local key (the wrapper instances), as well as lead to unexpected lookup behavior, because each instance acts as it's own unique key for the task local storage lookups.

Author: Thanks, the rewording sounds good 👍

> The important thing about declaring a task-local is that there must be one instance of it. Not doing so is very likely a programmer mistake, will lead to increased and unexpected memory use by multiple instances of the task-local key (the wrapper instances), as well as lead to unexpected lookup behavior, because each instance acts as it's own unique key for the task local storage lookups.

Author: ```suggestion
Each task-local declaration represents its own, independent task-local storage. Reading from one declaration will never observe a value stored using a different declaration, even if the declarations look exactly the same.
```

```swift
enum Library {
  @TaskLocal
  var requestID: String?
      // error: @TaskLocal declaration 'requestID' must be static. 
      // Task locals declarations must be static stored properties.
}
```

It is expected that task-local property declarations will often decide to use an optional type, and default it to `nil`. 

Some declarations however may have "good defaults", such as an empty container type, or some other representation of "not present". For example if `Task.Priority` were expressed using a task local, its `.unspecified` value would be a perfect default value to use in the task-local property declaration. We are certain similar cases exist, and thus want to allow users to retain full control over the type of the property, even if most often an optional is the right thing to use.

Accessing the value of a task-local property is done by accessing the property wrapper annotated property.

> The access is specifically designed to be explicit, because it is not a trivial access. It incurs a thread-local lookup of the Swift Concurrency runtime's task object, as well as a potential scan over multiple tasks (from child to parent tasks), in search for the first available binding of the value.

Author: I missed this, thank you @benrimmington !

  print("request-id: \(id)")
}
```

The task local value is accessible using the same API from async and non async functions, even though it relies on running inside a Task. The asynchronous function always performs a lookup inside the current task, since it is guaranteed to have a current task, while the synchronous function simply immediately returns the default value if it is _not_ called from within a Task context. 

> :warning: Task-local value lookups are more expensive than a direct static property lookup. They involve a thread-local access and scanning a stack of value bindings until a value is found, or the end of the stack is reached. As such, task-local values should be used with care, and e.g. hoisted out of for loops etc, so they are only looked up _once_ whenever possible.

Binding values is the most crucial piece of this design, as it embraces the structured nature of Swift's concurrency. Unlike thread-local values, it is not possible to just "set" a task local value. This avoids the issue of values being set and forgotten about leading to leaks and hard to debug issues with unexpected values being read in other pieces of code which did not expect them. 

> Using scopes and limiting a values lifetime of the task's lifetime the implementation to use efficient task-local allocation techniques, avoiding the sysdem wide allocator. Once the scope ends, the child task ends, and the associated task local value is discarded.

Reviewer 2: The new commas are ungrammatical, but the other changes are good

> Using scopes and limiting a values lifetime of the task's lifetime the implementation to use efficient task-local allocation techniques, avoiding the sysdem wide allocator. Once the scope ends, the child task ends, and the associated task local value is discarded.

Author: ```suggestion
By using scopes and limiting a value's lifetime to the task's lifetime the implementation can use efficient task-local allocation techniques, thereby avoiding the system-wide allocator. Once the scope ends, the child task ends, and the associated task-local value is discarded.
```

> Using scopes and limiting a values lifetime of the task's lifetime the implementation to use efficient task-local allocation techniques, avoiding the sysdem wide allocator. Once the scope ends, the child task ends, and the associated task local value is discarded.

Author: Thank you, including without the `,`

> To bind a specific task-local declaration to a specific value, we can use the `withValue(_:body:)` function which is declared on the property wrapper type. In order to access this function the `$` sign must be prefixed to the property name, to access the property wrapper's projected value rather than the wrapped value itself:

Author: Seems we want  `operation:`

```
To bind a specific task-local declaration to a specific value, we can use the `withValue(_:operation:)` function which is declared on the property wrapper type. In order to access this function the `$` sign must be prefixed to the property name, to access the property wrapper's projected value rather than the wrapped value itself:

```

> To bind a specific task-local declaration to a specific value, we can use the `withValue(_:body:)` function which is declared on the property wrapper type. In order to access this function the `$` sign must be prefixed to the property name, to access the property wrapper's projected value rather than the wrapped value itself:

Author: ```suggestion
To bind a specific task-local declaration to a specific value, we can use the `withValue(_:operation:)` function which is declared on the property wrapper type. In order to access this function the `$` sign must be prefixed to the property name, to access the property wrapper's projected value rather than the wrapped value itself:
```

The property wrapper itself must be a `class` because we use it's stable object identifier as *key* for the value lookups performed by the concurrency runtime.

The implementation of task locals relies on the existence of `withUnsafeCurrentTask` from the [Structured Concurrency proposal](0304-structured-concurrency.md). This is how we are able to obtain a task reference, regardless if within or outside of an asynchronous context.

> 

Author: Uhm... wat, I swear removed all these o_O Seems I forgot to push... 🤦

> Please refer to [Rejected alternatives](#rejected-alternatives), for an in depth analysis of the shortcomings of thread-locals, and how task-local `withValue` scopes address them.  

> Binding values is done by using the `$myTaskLocal.withValue(_:body:)` function, which adds task local values for the duration of the operation:

Reviewer 2: Isn't `operation:` the usual label for functions like this?  Maybe we're inconsistent.

> Binding values is done by using the `$myTaskLocal.withValue(_:body:)` function, which adds task local values for the duration of the operation:

Author: happy to use `operation`, will do 👍

> Binding values is done by using the `$myTaskLocal.withValue(_:body:)` function, which adds task local values for the duration of the operation:

Author: ```suggestion
Binding values is done by using the `$myTaskLocal.withValue(_:operation:)` function, which adds task local values for the duration of the operation:
```

And finally, if we wanted to set the `withWasabi` reference for most of the tasks in some scope, except one or two of them, we can compose the scopes to achieve this, as expected:

```swift
await Lib.$wasabiPreference.withValue(.withWasabi) {
  async let firstMeal = cookDinner()
  async let secondMeal = cookDinner()

>   let noWasabiMeal = await Lib.$wasabiPreference.withValue(.withoutWasabi) { 

Reviewer 2: Looks like it, since we're `await`ing it later.

>   let noWasabiMeal = await Lib.$wasabiPreference.withValue(.withoutWasabi) { 

Author: oh yes, thank you

And finally, if we wanted to set the `withWasabi` reference for most of the tasks in some scope, except one or two of them, we can compose the scopes to achieve this, as expected:

```swift
await Lib.$wasabiPreference.withValue(.withWasabi) {
  async let firstMeal = cookDinner()
  async let secondMeal = cookDinner()

>   spawn let noWasabiMeal = Lib.$wasabiPreference.withValue(.withoutWasabi) {

Reviewer: (If the other examples aren't going to use `spawn let`.)

```suggestion
  async let noWasabiMeal = Lib.$wasabiPreference.withValue(.withoutWasabi) {
```

Author: The other way around and I'm changing that now :) Spawn let will go into review shortly and we're confident in the name

> This implies that stored values may be accessed from different tasks executing concurrently. In order to guaratnee the safely task local values must conform to the `Sendable` protocol, introduced in [SE-302: `Sendable` and `@Sendable` closures](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0302-concurrent-value-and-concurrent-closures.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This implies that stored values may be accessed from different tasks executing concurrently. In order to guarantee safety, task-local values must conform to the `Sendable` protocol, introduced in [SE-0302](0302-concurrent-value-and-concurrent-closures.md).
```

The same mechanism also works with tasks spawned in task groups or async let declarations, because those also construct child tasks, which then inherit the bound task-local values of the outer scope.

```swift

> await Lib.$number.withValue(boundTo: 42) {

Reviewer 3: Looks like boundTo was left here. @ktoso

Author: Thanks, fixing

Such annotations depend on the arrival of [Function Wrappers](https://forums.swift.org/t/prepitch-function-wrappers/33618) or a similar feature to them, which currently are not being actively worked on, however we definitely have in the back of our minds while designing this proposal.

### Language features to avoid nesting with `withValue`

It is necessary for task-local correctness to only bind values for a given scope. 

This scoping rule is enforced by the only API to bind a task-local value being the `withValue() { ... }` function. The function essentially does two operations: 

- pushes a new binding onto the task-local bindings stack in the current task
- (executes the user provided `body` closure)
- and pops the binding from the task-local bindings stack of the current task

This structure allows us to use task-local allocation safely, and also ensure that no lingering values ever "leak" the scope where they were defined.

It is, however, slightly cumbersome on a source level to have to indent code only in order to get this property when in reality most of the time a binding is going to be set for the entirety (or remaining part) of the current function.

> It Swift were to gain some "`using`" mechanism, that would encapsulate the pattern of doing one "start" operation now, and an "end" operation at scope exit. That would bee a very general feature with broad applicability. The same mechanism could be used by task-locals rather than resorting to nesting. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Swift were to gain some "`using`" mechanism, that would encapsulate the pattern of doing one "start" operation now, and an "end" operation at scope exit. That would be a very general feature with broad applicability. The same mechanism could be used by task-locals rather than resorting to nesting. 
```

Reviewer 2: No comma after "now"

> It Swift were to gain some "`using`" mechanism, that would encapsulate the pattern of doing one "start" operation now, and an "end" operation at scope exit. That would bee a very general feature with broad applicability. The same mechanism could be used by task-locals rather than resorting to nesting. 

Author: ```suggestion
If Swift were to gain some "`using`" mechanism, that would encapsulate the pattern of doing one "start" operation now and an "end" operation at scope exit. That would be a very general feature with broad applicability. The same mechanism could be used by task-locals rather than resorting to nesting. 
```
